Please do not drain your glass dry until the end of these remarks.
You're in for a brief State of the Union or State of the Association address, along with some elaborate pep talk without the profanity.
It will take, give me 15 minutes and I'll set my key.
Housekeeping before substance.
We do have breakfasts, but they will be spartan.
for reasons of budget and of the state of the association.
Therefore, many of you, and perhaps most of you, should have real breakfast and then come to our breakfast.
However, the dinner will not be a bacchanal, but thanks to an anonymous member's gift,
For wine, we will have, we are not having a cash bar now, and we will not have a cash bar.
I think you've discovered the three book exhibits in the foyer, I guess it's called, and please have a look at them.
They are from members' books.
and boarders and from the Association of University Presses.
I'm grateful for them for having put them up.
I have two requests to you.
I've given an awful lot of orders, I've been told, but these are requests.
That you participate and that you mix.
We are having discussion sections, which are something of an experiment.
There will be no major paper.
You, as contributors, will have to produce the paper yourselves in your remarks on the topics which are announced for the discussion sections and the program.
The program is still required.
So please, think ahead.
What are you going to say on these subjects?
And then we have scheduled this reception, two breakfasts, a lunch, and a dinner in order to allow you to meet one another.
Who are we?
So there are plenty of people involved here and introduce yourselves to one another.
Vanish shyness and sit with strangers.
There will be no head table for those of us who for the moment are officers and speakers and the principal speakers, they will sit anywhere, we will all be at one together.
So, and then please do not forget the members meeting which is tomorrow afternoon at 5.
I think I may have to be reminded of it myself and then have to forget that.
Now, our history as an association can be told in the encompass.
a reform movement in literary studies came to life in California.
That does not mean to do this.
A small group of colleagues found the simple words that I now consider our constitution to foster a literary imagination and a common literary culture.
Enough people signed that statement to permit an organizing meeting here in Boston in 1934.
It led to our first conference in Minneapolis in September of 1994.
and in terms of this conference.
We are here because of our convictions about the nature and the proper study of literature or sortism.
I shall not ask for a show of hands on your political convictions.
But I'll mention that some of you believe it is possible and reasonable to be conservationists in cultural matters and liberal in political matters.
In any case, we have generally agreed to eschew politics and to stick to literature.
Now we have something like 1900 numbers, an annual entrance, a quality newspaper, and plans for a journal which will hear tomorrow.
As Martin Luther King asked, following Chernyshevsky and Lenin and Tolstoy, where do we go from here?
My experience as president tells me that the association has not yet spawned opposing factions.
Rather, each of us, as an individual, is likely to feel an understandable ambulance about the group.
We envision two very different kinds of activity.
First, the association should pursue
and encourage a study of literature centered on the value of literary values and provide a lively alternative to the many ideological studies and approaches that have occupied the field.
We can sing our song so effectively and patiently that we shall win back to the folk that faithful will have strayed.
Secondly,
The society should actively oppose programs and departments that call themselves literary, but in which ideology and special interests take precedence over the literary imagination and the shared literary culture.
We must fight back to regain lost ground.
Now let's think a moment.
Must we choose between the two?
The second may be too aggressive for us cultural conservationists.
Can't we accomplish the second by doing the first convincingly?
Most of us in any case seem to believe that the first, pursuing literature on its own terms, must precede the second, opposing non-literary intrusions.
The committee that planned this conference
Jenny Clay, Jim Engle, Robin Miller, and Christopher Ricks, the chairman, chose to stay away from polemical topics.
During these three days in Boston, we are discussing what we believe in, not what we default.
But now that we are completing our second year of good behavior, it is not time for us to allow a judicial activism.
Can't we become more dedicated to our cause without becoming shrill?
As president, I have been sorely tried.
Job announcements in English and language call increasingly for non-literary qualifications.
Publishers' humanities catalogs read with the categories gender, culture, slash power, mental studies, and theory before literature and the classics are even mentioned.
And no one really knows what is being read in the required freshman English and composition courses for which we are all basically responsible.
Every case of literature spurned pushes me further toward favoring group action.
Meanwhile, we must not neglect the responsibilities of individuals.
We can still speak and vote in meetings.
Reason and common sense are not entirely dead.
Given the choice, students still respond to literature taught not as little ideology, but as a subtle art vitally concerned with life.
But how long will they have the choice?
Those of us with tenure must stand firm in decisions about persons, curriculum, programs, requirements, hirings, and promotions.
And, as always, a clear opportunity for counteroffensive belongs to individuals.
I have three examples.
The pseudo-history, called Afrocentrism, has been exposed and torn to shreds by a single book.
Now I'll ask her by Mary Lefkowitz, who was one of our earliest members.
Is she here?
Is Mary Lefkowitz here?
Please stand up.
Thank you.
The pseudo-theory of the social construction of scientific laws along with its bombastic prose style has been wickedly paroled in social text by a non-visual who is not here.
And the historian, he is not here either, Russell Jacoby, whom you may not know, has raised his voice in our support.
The closing pages, the closing chapters of dogmatic wisdom.
confront the obscurantist post-style of some of our most extreme colleagues who claim that, quote, clarity is repressive.
And Jacobi's lingua franca article, Marginal Returns, September of 95, gives post-colonial theory that public gloving deserves.
These three examples suggest that individual attacks can pinpoint specific abuses and seriously weaken them, and that there are more projects of this kind afoot, as many of you know.
I advocate, therefore, a measured increase in activism from both the Association and from the individuals who support it in order to restore literature to literary studies.
However, I believe there is a deeper level of unease among us than the purely literary.
In our democratic society, the only basic functions of justice, of politics, of the marketplace, and of sports all operate on the basis of an adversarial system.
Someone wins and someone loses.
In these part of times, the teaching and the learning and the reading of literature are being drawn increasingly into that adversarial system.
Daniel Trilling spotted the development way ahead of time in the 1960s when he referred to the adversary culture.
Now we have a starker and a darker phrase, the cultural wars.
In the classroom too, must we now succumb to the adversarial culture?
I strongly oppose that.
A sounder dynamic resides in dialogue, a friendly dialogue between tradition and discovery.
We are not your enemies, proclaimed the modern French poet Apollinaire, my first great love.
He was talking about
I put in a friendly quarrel between order and adventure, leads not to the victory of one side or the other, but to the reconciliation embodied in La Jolie-Housse, the redhead, the pretty redhead, when we went on to town.
I put in his own poetry, sometimes haunting the tradition, and sometimes brashly experimentally, sings against the belligerently adversarial system in literature and education.
Out of these remarks, I have a few proposals to make.
I suggest that next year's conference promote one major session to an examination and critique of the textbooks now available for use in composition and freshman English courses.
What literature do they contain, if any?
Which have had the widest adoptions?
What do they teach?
What kinds of professors produce them?
What kinds of results can we expect from their word spread use?
How could we do that?
Compared to curricula and course descriptions, these textbooks provide an available and very concrete type topic for us to examine as scholars and critics.
Hundreds of thousands of students take these courses.
We must not abandon these students to essentially non-literary programs and approaches.
I suggest also that one or two members be delegated to explore with book editors,
the categories and series in which publishing houses tend to acquire and present their titles.
How extensive are the self-fulfilling effects of always leading with culture, power, gender, and theory?
Why do so many editors now dismiss the category of the single author book?
As for my third proposal, I issue an unabashed call, not for papers, but for satires and parodies, only on the excesses of our profession.
Somewhere among us, there must lie sleeping a Pervantes, or a Swift, or a Hope, or a Voltaire.
Is there any truth in the room that Ron Charles came from this organization?
It's a good one of the organizations.
It is, for those of you who don't know about it,
is a powerful parody of a letter of application for a trial of a person who reports to a person who's in a nation of pilot literature and, of course, the one step out of the boat.
When he comes to the end, then Mary Wollstonecraft is presenting as the author of The Pirates of Red Band.
Thank you for the illustration.
The time has come, for me, is by a 20th thesis to the 19th thesis on literature that I stirred together for the original group
who wants this organization two years ago.
Thesis 20.
The test of the highest poetry is that it eludes all tests.
In these words, Swinburne leaped far beyond
a snappy quip and the Irish wolf.
He told the essential and exasperating truth about literature and thusly bear the terrifying challenge of ever teaching.
We have a toast now.
Long live.
Long live the literary imagination and a common literary culture.
[Applause.]
[Crowd murmuring.]